OBSDOCS-1101: Logging 6.0 Release Notes (#82065)
openshift/openshift-docs: modules/logging-release-notes-6-0-0.adoc

// module included in logging-6-0-release-notes.adoc
:_mod-docs-content-type: REFERENCE
[id="logging-release-notes-6-0-0_{context}"]
= Logging 6.0.0

This release includes link:https://access.redhat.com/errata/RHBA-2024:6693[OpenShift Logging Bug Fix Release 6.0.0]

[id="logging-release-notes-6-0-0-compatibility-support-matrix"]
= Compatibility and support matrix

In the table, components are marked with the following statuses:

[horizontal]
TP:: Technology Preview
GA:: General Availability

The components or features in link:https://access.redhat.com/support/offerings/techpreview[Technology Preview] status are experimental and are not intended for production use.

[NOTE]
====
To know about compatible {product-title} versions for {logging-uc} releases, see link:https://access.redhat.com/product-life-cycles?product=Red%20Hat%20OpenShift%20Logging[Product Life Cycles].
====

.Components support matrix
[options="header"]
|===

| {logging-uc} Version 6+| Component Version

| Operator | `eventrouter` | `logfilemetricexplorer` | `loki` | `lokistack-gateway` | `opa-openshift` | `vector`

> |6.0 | 0.4 (GA) | v1.1 (GA) | v3.1.0 (GA) | v0.1 (GA) | v0.1 (GA) | v0.37.x (GA)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|6.0 | 0.4 (GA) | v1.1 (GA) | v3.1.0 (GA) | v0.1 (GA) | v0.1 (GA) | v0.37.1 (GA)
```

|===

[id="logging-release-notes-6-0-0-removal-notice"]
== Removal notice

In Logging 6.0, the support is removed for:

* Red Hat managed Elasticsearch log storage solution. For example, elasticsearch-operator
* Red Hat managed log visualization using Kibana and Console Log View Plugin
* Fluentd-based log collector implementations
+
[NOTE]
====

> The log collector deployments based on Fluentd will migrate to Vector

Reviewer 2: This is not true, no migration exists.   I'm not sure there is a need to mention anything about vector (the replacement) here?

Author: Okay. Got this info from the release notes text. Will remove this note.

====
* ClusterLogging.logging.openshift.io custom resource

> * ClusterLogForwarder.logging.openshift.io custom resource

Reviewer 2: These CR bullets get lost under the title in my opinion and lose their meaning.    can we add (replaced by single "observability" resource)?  or similar?   or, at least a clarifying statement that details the result of this "removal"

Author: @cahartma Can you please elaborate upon the change? The bullet covers the following jiras: [https://issues.redhat.com/browse/LOG-5368](https://www.google.com/url?q=https://issues.redhat.com/browse/LOG-5368&sa=D&source=docs&ust=1726987835120699&usg=AOvVaw1si58vTpNdxdMIDLDDHw81) and [https://issues.redhat.com/browse/LOG-5803](https://www.google.com/url?q=https://issues.redhat.com/browse/LOG-5803&sa=D&source=docs&ust=1726987835120787&usg=AOvVaw3nKqMOmGH_0-rRKBgAV6rm)
I have used the content from the release notes text. Do let me know what else do you need added in here.

Author: @cahartma If the bullet points were causing confusion, i have removed it and put in sentences instead.

[NOTE]
====
In order to continue to use Elasticsearch and Kibana managed by the elasticsearch-operator, the administrator must modify those object's ownerRefs before deleting the ClusterLogging resource.
====

[id="logging-release-notes-6-0-0-enhancements"]
== New features and enhancements
=== Log Collection

> 

Reviewer: I feel like we should have a bullet point mentioning the introduction of the new CR since that's the major "new" feature of this release

Author: @JoaoBraveCoding Kindly point me out the the jira with updated release notes text and I will add it in the beginning.

Reviewer 3: I don't see where we are documenting the epic https://issues.redhat.com/browse/LOG-3493  which implies API and the the majority of what drives this release.  Additionally there is no mention of https://issues.redhat.com/browse/LOG-4225  which is another epic witha new feature

Author: @jcantrill I have added https://issues.redhat.com/browse/LOG-3493. Kindly check the bottom of release notes that states tech Preview features separately, you will find https://issues.redhat.com/browse/LOG-4225.

* Before this update, the Vector collector deployments had no limits on memory and CPU usage. With this update, default requests and limits are set based on the recommendations from the Vector documentation. (link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/LOG-4745[LOG-4745])

* This enhancement brings Vector in line with the upstream Vector version v0.37.1. (link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/LOG-5296[LOG-5296])

* With this release, an alert triggers when log collectors buffer logs to a node's file system and use over 15% of the available space. This may indicate the log collectors are facing back pressure from their outputs, and administrators should act to prevent potential issues on the cluster node. (link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/LOG-5381[LOG-5381])

* This enhancement updates the selectors for all components to use common Kubernetes labels. (link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/LOG-5906[LOG-5906])

> * With this update, the collector configuration now deploys as a ConfigMap instead of a secret. This change allows users to view and edit the configuration when the collector is not managed. (link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/LOG-5599[LOG-5599])

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* With this update, the collector configuration will be deployed as a ConfigMap instead of a Secret. This change allows users to view and edit the configuration when the ClusterLogForwarder is set to Unmanaged. (link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/LOG-5599[LOG-5599])
```

* With this release, the must-gather functionality is updated to only capture information for inspecting Logging 6.0 components, including Vector deployments from `ClusterLogForwarder.observability.openshift.io` resources and the Red Hat managed `LokiStack` provided by the Loki Operator.

=== Log Storage

* With this update, the Azure storage secret validation now provides early warnings for specific error conditions. (link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/LOG-4571[LOG-4571])
* Before this update, the Loki Operator configured Loki to use path-based style access for the Amazon Simple Storage Service (S3), which has been deprecated. With this update, the Loki Operator defaults to virtual-host style without users needing to change their configuration. (link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/LOG-5051[LOG-5051])
* Before this update, the Loki Operator did not validate the Amazon Simple Storage Service (S3) endpoint used in the storage secret. With this update, the validation process ensures the S3 endpoint is a valid S3 URL, and the `LokiStack` status updates to indicate any invalid URLs. (link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/LOG-5052[LOG-5052])

> * With this release, the responsibility for deploying the logging view plugin shifts from the ClusterLoggingOperator to the ClusterObservabilityOperator. For new log storage installations that need visualization, the ClusterObservabilityOperator and the associated UIPlugin resource must be deployed. Refer to the official product documentation for more details. (link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/LOG-5461[LOG-5461])

Reviewer: I think this should maybe be included in the Collector release notes since that was the component that was responsible for visualization. It should also be one of the first topics to show on the list since it has a high impact

Author: I am not sure what's collector release notes but I will move this to the top. Thanks!

* Before this update, the Loki Operator would crash if the `CredentialRequest` specification was registered in an environment without the `cloud-credentials-operator`. With this update, the `CredentialRequest` specification only registers in environments that are `cloud-credentials-operator` enabled. (link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/LOG-5431[LOG-5431])

* Before this update, the Loki Operator overwrote user annotations on the LokiStack Route resource, causing customizations to drop. With this update, the Loki Operator no longer overwrites Route annotations, fixing the issue. (link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/LOG-5566[LOG-5566])

=== Log Console

* Before this update, an issue prevented selecting pods that no longer existed, even if they had generated logs. With this update, this issue has been fixed, allowing selection of such pods. (link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/LOG-5287[LOG-5287])

[id="logging-release-notes-6-0-0-CVEs"]
== CVEs

* link:https://access.redhat.com/security/cve/CVE-2024-34397[CVE-2024-34397]

[id="logging-release-notes-6-0-0-technology-preview-features"]
== Technology Preview features

> * With this release, a Technology Preview of log forwarding through the OpenTelemetry Observability Framework is enabled. A new output type,` OTLP`, allows sending JSON-encoded log records using the OpenTelemetry data model and resource semantic conventions. (link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/LOG-4225[LOG-4225])

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* With this release, introduces log forwarding using the OpenTelemetry. A new output type,` OTLP`, allows sending JSON-encoded log records using the OpenTelemetry data model and resource semantic conventions. (link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/LOG-4225[LOG-4225])
```

Author: @JoaoBraveCoding If it still come under tech preview, I suppose it should come in the sentence as well. I'll make the rest of the changes.

// module included in logging-6-0-release-notes.adoc
:_mod-docs-content-type: REFERENCE
[id="logging-release-notes-6-0-0_{context}"]
= Logging 6.0.0

This release includes link:https://access.redhat.com/errata/RHBA-2024:6693[OpenShift Logging Bug Fix Release 6.0.0]

[id="logging-release-notes-6-0-0-compatibility-support-matrix"]
= Compatibility and support matrix

In the table, components are marked with the following statuses:

[horizontal]
TP:: Technology Preview
GA:: General Availability

The components or features in link:https://access.redhat.com/support/offerings/techpreview[Technology Preview] status are experimental and are not intended for production use.

[NOTE]
====
To know about compatible {product-title} versions for {logging-uc} releases, see link:https://access.redhat.com/product-life-cycles?product=Red%20Hat%20OpenShift%20Logging[Product Life Cycles].
====

.Components support matrix
[options="header"]
|===

| {logging-uc} Version 6+| Component Version

> | Operator | `eventrouter` | `logfilemetricexplorer` | `loki` | `lokistack-gateway` | `opa-openshift` | `vector`

Author: @xperimental I can correct or remove the table, if you think it won't be useful to the customers. Do let me know.

> | Operator | `eventrouter` | `logfilemetricexplorer` | `loki` | `lokistack-gateway` | `opa-openshift` | `vector`

Reviewer 4: If I remember correctly, some customer had asked the version.

> |6.0 | 0.4 (GA) | v1.1 (GA) | v3.1.0 (GA) | v0.1 (GA) | v0.1 (GA) | v0.37.1 (GA)

Author: Done!

|===

[id="logging-release-notes-6-0-0-removal-notice"]
== Removal notice

In Logging 6.0, the support is removed for:

* Red Hat managed Elasticsearch log storage solution. For example, elasticsearch-operator

> * Red Hat managed log visualization using Kibana and Console Log View Plugin

Reviewer 3: Support still exists for the console log view plugin.  ONLY kibana was removed

Author: Since it was mentioned in the release notes text section, it';s mentioned here. I'll remove console view plugin.

// module included in logging-6-0-release-notes.adoc
:_mod-docs-content-type: REFERENCE
[id="logging-release-notes-6-0-0_{context}"]
= Logging 6.0.0

> This release includes link:https://access.redhat.com/errata/RHBA-2024:6693[logging for Red Hat Openshift Bug Fix Release 6.0.0]

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
This release includes link:https://access.redhat.com/errata/RHBA-2024:6693[{logging} {for} Bug Fix Release 6.0.0]
```

In the table, components are marked with the following statuses:

[horizontal]
TP:: Technology Preview
GA:: General Availability

The components or features in link:https://access.redhat.com/support/offerings/techpreview[Technology Preview] status are experimental and are not intended for production use.

[NOTE]
====
To know about compatible {product-title} versions for {logging-uc} releases, see link:https://access.redhat.com/product-life-cycles?product=Red%20Hat%20OpenShift%20Logging[Product Life Cycles].
====

.Components support matrix
[options="header"]
|===

| {logging-uc} Version 6+| Component Version

| Operator | `eventrouter` | `logfilemetricexporter` | `loki` | `lokistack-gateway` | `opa-openshift` | `vector`

|6.0 | 0.4 (GA) | 1.1 (GA) | 3.1.0 (GA) | 0.1 (GA) | 0.1 (GA) | 0.37.1 (GA)

|===

[id="logging-release-notes-6-0-0-removal-notice"]
== Removal notice

* With this release, logging no longer supports the `ClusterLogging.logging.openshift.io` and `ClusterLogForwarder.logging.openshift.io` custom resources. Refer to the product documentation for details on the replacement features. (link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/LOG-5803[LOG-5803])

> * With this release,logging no longer manages or deploys log storage (such as Elasticsearch), visualization (such as Kibana), or Fluentd-based log collectors. (link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/LOG-5368[LOG-5368])

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* With this release, logging no longer manages or deploys log storage (such as Elasticsearch), visualization (such as Kibana), or Fluentd-based log collectors. (link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/LOG-5368[LOG-5368])
```

Reviewer: nit: Do you think we should mention the OpenShift logging console plug-in here VS only mentioning Kibana?

Author: @j\I got a review comment stating that support still exists for console plug-in. See https://github.com/openshift/openshift-docs/pull/82065#discussion_r1771444705. So I removed it.

[NOTE]
====

> In order to continue to use Elasticsearch and Kibana managed by the elasticsearch-operator, the administrator must modify those object's ownerRefs before deleting the ClusterLogging resource.

Reviewer: Is this a supported solution?

Author: I would let engineering confirm that. If there are comments to remove this solution, I will.

Reviewer 6: Removing the owner-reference is part of the recommended migration to using LokiStack as log storage. It allows the customer to continue to run ES & Kibana to query logs still stored there until the retention period has passed.

====

[id="logging-release-notes-6-0-0-enhancements"]
== New features and enhancements
=== Log Collection

> * This feature introduces a new architecture for Red Hat OpenShift Logging by shifting component responsibilities to their relevant operators, such as for storage, visualization, and collection. It introduces the `ClusterLogForwarder.observability.openshift.io` API for log collection and forwarding. Support for the `ClusterLogging.logging.openshift.io` and `ClusterLogForwarder.logging.openshift.io` APIs, along with the Red Hat managed Elastic stack (Elasticsearch and Kibana), is removed. Users are encouraged to migrate to the Red Hat `LokiStack` for log storage. Existing managed Elasticsearch deployments can be used for a limited time. Automated migration for log collection is not provided, so administrators need to create a new ClusterLogForwarder.observability.openshift.io specification to replace their previous custom resources. Refer to the official product documentation for more details. (link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/LOG-3493[LOG-3493])

Reviewer: I feel we should add some links in this bullet:
- "Red Hat `LokiStack` for log storage": Link to the OCP docs for setting up loki-operator
- "Elasticsearch deployments can be used for a limited time": Link to a deprecation notice of ES, how long is limited time?
- "Refer to the official product documentation for more details.": Link to the migration procedure

Author: I suppose bullet points will be useful, if there's a flow to what is being written. I tried writing a removal notice in bullet points earlier and it didn't work out as it somewhat changed the meaning or made it more confusing. Hence, ignoring this for now.

> * This feature introduces a new architecture for Red Hat OpenShift Logging by shifting component responsibilities to their relevant operators, such as for storage, visualization, and collection. It introduces the `ClusterLogForwarder.observability.openshift.io` API for log collection and forwarding. Support for the `ClusterLogging.logging.openshift.io` and `ClusterLogForwarder.logging.openshift.io` APIs, along with the Red Hat managed Elastic stack (Elasticsearch and Kibana), is removed. Users are encouraged to migrate to the Red Hat `LokiStack` for log storage. Existing managed Elasticsearch deployments can be used for a limited time. Automated migration for log collection is not provided, so administrators need to create a new ClusterLogForwarder.observability.openshift.io specification to replace their previous custom resources. Refer to the official product documentation for more details. (link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/LOG-3493[LOG-3493])

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
* This feature introduces a new architecture for Red Hat OpenShift Logging by shifting component responsibilities to their relevant Operators, such as for storage, visualization, and collection. It introduces the `ClusterLogForwarder.observability.openshift.io` API for log collection and forwarding. Support for the `ClusterLogging.logging.openshift.io` and `ClusterLogForwarder.logging.openshift.io` APIs, along with the Red Hat managed Elastic stack (Elasticsearch and Kibana), is removed. Users are encouraged to migrate to the Red Hat `LokiStack` for log storage. Existing managed Elasticsearch deployments can be used for a limited time. Automated migration for log collection is not provided, so administrators need to create a new ClusterLogForwarder.observability.openshift.io specification to replace their previous custom resources. Refer to the official product documentation for more details. (link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/LOG-3493[LOG-3493])
```

Reviewer 7: OCP Operators get a capital O.

* Before this update, the Vector collector deployments had no limits on memory and CPU usage. With this update, default requests and limits are set based on the recommendations from the Vector documentation. (link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/LOG-4745[LOG-4745])

* This enhancement brings Vector in line with the upstream Vector version v0.37.1. (link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/LOG-5296[LOG-5296])

> * With this release, an alert triggers when log collectors buffer logs to a node's file system and use over 15% of the available space. This may indicate the log collectors are facing back pressure from their outputs, and administrators should act to prevent potential issues on the cluster node. (link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/LOG-5381[LOG-5381])

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
* With this release, an alert triggers when log collectors buffer logs to the file system of a node and use over 15% of the available space. This may indicate the log collectors are facing back pressure from their outputs, and administrators should act to prevent potential issues on the cluster node. (link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/LOG-5381[LOG-5381])
```

Reviewer 7: Avoid using possessives for inanimate objects: https://www.ibm.com/docs/en/ibm-style?topic=grammar-possessives

* This enhancement updates the selectors for all components to use common Kubernetes labels. (link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/LOG-5906[LOG-5906])

> * With this update, the collector configuration will deploy as a ConfigMap instead of a Secret. This change allows users to view and edit the configuration when the ClusterLogForwarder is set to `Unmanaged`.(link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/LOG-5599[LOG-5599])

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
* With this update, the collector configuration deploys as a `ConfigMap` instead of a secret. This change allows users to view and edit the configuration when the `ClusterLogForwarder` is set to `Unmanaged`. (link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/LOG-5599[LOG-5599])
```

Reviewer 7: - Avoid future tense, so will deploy -> deploys, per IBMSG.
- Config map either needs to be two separate words or in backticks, see https://redhat-documentation.github.io/supplementary-style-guide/#config-map
- I don't think secrets needs to be capitalized. 
- I think ClusterLogForwarder needs backticks since its an API.

> * With this release, the log level for the Vector collector can be configured using an annotation on the ClusterLogForwarder. The log level options include trace, debug, info, warn, error, or off. (link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/LOG-5372[LOG-5372])

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
* With this release, the log level for the Vector collector can be configured using an annotation on the `ClusterLogForwarder`. The log level options include trace, debug, info, warn, error, or off. (link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/LOG-5372[LOG-5372])
```

Reviewer 7: Do the log level options need backticks? Not sure how they are treated in the docs.

> * This enhancement adds validation to reject configurations where CloudWatch outputs use multiple AWS roles. Previously, logs were incorrectly routed to the first AWS role defined. (link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/LOG-5640[LOG-5640])

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
* This enhancement adds validation to reject configurations where Amazon CloudWatch outputs use multiple AWS roles. Previously, logs were incorrectly routed to the first AWS role defined. (link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/LOG-5640[LOG-5640])
```

Reviewer 7: Since this is the first use in the release notes, its good to say "Amazon" here. I see "Amazon Cloud Watch" used consistently in the docs.

* This enhancement removes the *Log Bytes Collected* and *Log Bytes Sent* graphs from the metrics dashboard. (link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/LOG-5964[LOG-5964])

> * With this release, the must-gather functionality is updated to only capture information for inspecting Logging 6.0 components, including Vector deployments from `ClusterLogForwarder.observability.openshift.io` resources and the Red Hat managed `LokiStack` provided by the Loki Operator. (link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/LOG-5964[LOG-5949])

Reviewer 4: The link is wrong in line 70

Author: Changed the link. Thanks!

=== Log Storage

* With this release, the responsibility for deploying the logging view plugin shifts from the Cluster Logging Operator to the Cluster Observability Operator. For new log storage installations that need visualization, the Cluster Observability Operator and the associated UIPlugin resource must be deployed. Refer to the official product documentation for more details. (link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/LOG-5461[LOG-5461])

* With this update, the Azure storage secret validation now provides early warnings for specific error conditions. (link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/LOG-4571[LOG-4571])

[id="logging-release-notes-6-0-0-technology-preview-features"]
== Technology Preview features

* This release introduces a Technology Preview feature for log forwarding using OpenTelemetry. A new output type,` OTLP`, allows sending JSON-encoded log records using the OpenTelemetry data model and resource semantic conventions. (link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/LOG-4225[LOG-4225])

[id="logging-release-notes-6-0-0-known-issues"]
== Known issues 

None.

> 

Reviewer 7: Is it normal in Logging docs to say "None." in the event there's no known issues? If there are no Known Issues, I think this can just be removed.
